Dual color simultaneous detection of multiple antibiotics based on Ser/MUA co-functionalized fluorescent Au NCs
 Yaning Maoa, Yufeng Wua, Yongyin Niea, Jun Wanga, Shenghao Xua,*, Xiliang Luoa,*	

aKey Laboratory of Sensor Analysis of Tumor Marker, Ministry of Education, College of Chemistry and Molecular Engineering, Qingdao University of Science and Technology, Qingdao 266042, P. R. China 









*Corresponding author: 
E-mail: xushenghao@qust.edu.cn  xiliangluo@qust.edu.cn 
  
 
Abstract 
  In this work, an effective and simple strategy for rapidly synthesizing serine (Ser) and MUA co-functionalized Au NCs was developed for the first time. Thanks to the improvement of the ligand to metal charge transfer (LMCT) by electron-rich atoms (O or N, etc.) from serine (Ser), fluorescence generation time of the Au NCs could be dramaticly shortened from 20 h to 1 h. The as-prepared Ser/MUA co-functionalized  Au NCs exhibited considerable stability (temperature, pH and time stability) and were systematically characterized by Atomic force microscope (AFM), high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM), dynamic light scattering (DLS), fluorescence spectroscopy, infrared (IR) spectroscopy and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). Subsequently, the as-prepared Ser/MUA co-functionalized Au NCs together with Hg2+ were used for establishing a fluorescent turn on assay for simultaneous detection aureomycin (CTC) and oxytetracycline (OTC) based on recording the change of the recovered fluorescence intensity at 420 nm and 500 nm, with detection limits of 0.02 and 0.09 μM for CTC and OTC, respectively. In addition, visualization detection of CTC and OTC could also be obviously realized by UV lamp illumination. Furthermore, the practical application of this assay was further validated by simultaneously detecting CTC and OTC in human urine,demonstrating promising potential in clinical application.

Keywords Simultaneous detection; Visual detection; Gold nanoclusters; Multiple antibiotics; Fluorescence 

 
1. Introduction
Precise and sensitive sensing technologies for simultaneous detection of multiple antibiotics residues are of great significance due to their potential threats to public health [1]. So far, various techniques for simultaneous detection of multiple antibiotic residues have been established, including enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), microcip electrophoresis, electrochemical aptasensor and liquid chromatography (LC) et al [2-5]. Nevertheless, their routine detection maybe still restricted because of the non-negligible shortcomings, such as expensive apparatus, time consuming procedures and expert technical skills. Therefore, developing easy and powerful strategies for simultaneous detection of multiple antibiotics is highly desirable but still remains challenging.
As a promising and burgeoning kind of ﬂuorophores, thiolate-protected gold nanoclusters (Au NCs) have gained tremendous attention in biosensing and bioimaging owing to their remarkable optical and chemical properties, such as distinc high surface tenability, high photostability, and good biocompatibility [6-9]. Phase-transfer, ligand exchange and etching techniques have already been developed for the synthesis of alkanethiol stabilized fluorescent Au NCs [10]. However, sophisticated synthetic procedures or post-treatment still forms a major bottleneck for their routine synthesis. Recently, thiolate-protected Au NCs were firstly prepared by a simplified one-step synthesis method using 11-mercaptoundecanoic acid (MUA) as reducing and protecting agent [11]. Although this approach proved to be facile and efficient, the relatively long reaction time (about one day) is still an unignorable defect. Therefore, the development of effective method to solve this problem is in urgent demand.

In this work, aiming at solving the long synthetic time of the thiolate-protected Au NCs, we proposed a simple and effective strategy for rapidly synthesizing serine (Ser) and MUA co-functionalized Au NCs within 1h for the first time. Afterwards, the as-prepared Au NCs together with Hg2+ were used as ‘‘turn on’’ probes for multiple antibiotic detection. It is noteworthy that the determination of multiple antibiotic can be obtained not only by recording fluorescence recovery intensity but also by fluorescence color change visualization. Furthermore, multiple antibiotic in human urine could also be quantitative determinated, demonstrating  available potential in clinical application.  
2. Materials and methods
2.1. Materials
All reagents were of analytical reagent grade. HAuCl4•3H2O, 11-mercaptoundecanoic acid (MUA), Oxytetracycline (OTC), aureomycin (CTC), tetracycline (TC), streptomycin (STR), neomycin (NEO), spiramycin (SPM), erythromycin (ERY), chloramphenicol (CHL) and serine (Ser) were oatained from Sigma (St. Louis, MO, USA). All solutions were prepared using ultrapure water from a Millipore Simplicity 185 water purification system (Millipore, USA).  Morning urine was collected from a healthy volunteer and filtered through a 0.45 μm pore size filter to remove the insoluble matrix.
2.2. Instruments
All fluorescence measurements were recorded using an F-7000 (Hitachi, Japan) fluorescence spectrometer. High-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) images was performed on a JEOL JEM-2100 (JEOL, Japan) microscope operating at 200 kV. Atomic force microscope (AFM) measurements were performed using a Nanoscope V multimode atomic force microscope (Bruker, Germany) with a tapping mode. Zeta potentials were obtained by a Zetasizer Nano-ZS (Malvern Instruments, Malvern, UK). X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was carried out on a thermoelectron instrument (Thermo-VG Scientific ESCALAB 250). All spectra were referenced to the C 1s peak at 285.0 eV. Infrared (IR) spectra were obtained by a FT/IR-410 Fourier transform infrared spectrophotometer (JASCO, Japan).
2.3. Synthesis of Ser/MUA co-functionalized fluorescent Au NCs
Typically, 35 μL of 1 M NaOH and 200 μL of 10 mM MUA were added to the mixtures of 15μL of 10 mM HAuCl4 and 250 μL of 0.02 g/mL Ser. Afterwards, the mixture was placed at room temperature for 1 h without stirring. Then, the crude product was purified by centrifugation at 12 000 rpm for 10 min to remove large aggregates and then filtered with 10 kDa cutoff ultrafiltration centrifuge tube to get rid of excess reactants (MUA, Ser, salts, etc.). Finally, the as-purified Au NCs were stored at room temperature before further characterization and use.
2.4. Fluorescent “turn on” assay for simultaneously sensing OTC and CTC
2 mL of Au NCs solution (1/200) were mixed thoroughly with Hg2+ solution (12.5 μM) to quench the fluorescence. Then, the recovered fluorescence was recorded in the presence of different concentrations of OTC (0, 0.25, 0.625, 1.25, 3.75, 9.375, 18.75, 31.25, 37.5μM) and CTC (0, 0.05, 0.125, 0.25, 0.75, 1.875, 3.75, 6.25, 7.5μM). 
3. Results and discussion
3.1 Characterization of Ser/MUA co-functionalized fluorescent Au NCs
Ser/MUA co-functionalized fluorescent Au NCs were synthesized by a simple one-pot strategy (Fig. 1A). To characterize the Ser/MUA co-functionalized Au NCs, transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image in Fig. 1B shows they are spherical with good monodispersity, and the well-resolved lattice planes of approximately 0.23 nm spacing in the HRTEM image (inset in Fig.  1B) demonstrates the extraordinary crystalline structure of the Ser/MUA co-functionalized Au NCs [12]. Additionally, the average diameter is about 1.8 nm, calculated by estimating more than 100 particles in the TEM image. AFM experiment was also performed to characterize the Ser/MUA co-functionalized Au NCs. Fig. 1C shows the typical two-dimensional AFM images of the monodispersed Au NCs on freshly cleaned mica surfaces, the topographic morphology with small spherical dots and cross-sectional heights of the Au NCs reveals that these Au NCs have an average size of about 1.8 nm, which was consistent with TEM (Fig. 1B) and DLS results (Fig .1D).
 
Fig. 1 (A) Schematic illustration of synthesizing Ser/MUA co-functionalized Au NCs. Typical TEM image(B), two-dimensional AFM images (C) and dynamic light scattering (DLS) histogram (D) of the Ser/MUA co-functionalized Au NCs. 
As shown in Fig. 2A, the as-prepared Ser/MUA co-functionalized Au NCs, with a quantum yield (QY) of 8.5 % (calibrated with Rhodamine B as the reference), exhibit strong orange red fluorescence with an excitation/emission maximum at 282/608 nm. IR spectra was performed to obtain more information about the as-prepared Au NCs. As shown in Fig. 2B, there are two chief functional groups (–COOH and –NH2) on the surface of the as-prepared Au NCs, with the fact that asymmetric and symmetric stretching vibration peaks of COO– at 1600 and1400cm-1 and the –NH2 and –NH wagging band around 702 cm-1 [13,14], demonstrating both Ser and MUA collaboratively on the surface of the Au NCs. In order to further investigate the as-prepared Au NCs, XPS was conducted and the result was shown in Fig. 2C. The binding energies of Au 4f peaks are 88.68 eV and 84.88 eV, inferring that both Au0 and Au+ exist in the Au NCs [15], and the Au+ surrounded on the surface of gold core is beneficial for the stabilization of thiol-stabilized Au NCs [16]. Therefore, the as-prepared Ser/MUA co-functionalized Au NCs are proved to be high stable under various various temperatures (Fig. S1A) and pH values (Fig. S1B), and the fluorescence quenching only occurred slightly after one month of storage at room temperature (Fig. S1C). Moreover, C(1s), N(1s), O(1s), and S(2p) core-level photoemission spectra all appeared on the XPS spectrum (Fig. 2D), further indicating both MUA and Ser collaboratively stabilized the as-prepared Au NCs. In addition, functional groups (carboxylic and amino groups, etc.) or electron-rich atoms (O or N, etc.) from Ser could availably improve the ligand to metal charge transfer (LMCT) [17], which is beneficial to accelerate the emerge of fluorescence of the Ser/MUA co-functionalized Au NCs [18-20]. This may be the primary cause for the dramatic shortening of the time for the fluorescence generation (from 20 h to 1 h).
   
Fig. 2 (A) Excitation spectra (blue line) and emission (red line) spectra of the Ser/MUA co-functionalized Au NCs, inset shows photographs under sunlight (left) and 365 nm UV light (right) illumination. (B) Infrared spectroscopy of the Ser/MUA co-functionalized Au NCs. (C) Au 4f electron region of the XPS of the Ser/MUA co-functionalized Au NCs. (D) The whole XPS spectrum of the Ser/MUA co-functionalized Au NCs. C(1s), N(1s), O(1s), S(2p) and Au (4f) core-level photoemission spectra all appeared on the XPS spectrum.
3.2 Fluorescence assay for simultaneously “turn on” sensing OTC and CTC
Here, we designed a fluorescent off-on assay for simultaneously sensing OTC and CTC. It is reported that acidic functional groups (e.g., carboxylic acids) could chelate Hg2+ with extremely stability constants (logK = 10.1 for Hg2+) [21], and the as-prepared Au NCs would be aggregated because of the bridge functionalization of the Hg2+, resulting the aggregation-induced fluorescence quenching [22,23]. As shown in Fig. 3B, the fluorescence of the Ser/MUA co-functionalized Au NCs was gradually quenched with the increasing concentration of Hg2+ (0–50 μM). In the presence of 12.5 μM Hg2+, approximately 95% of the initial fluorescence intensity of the Ser/MUA co-functionalized Au NCs was quenched, and this Hg2+ concentration was then selected in the following experiments. Subsequently, we found that after adding CTC and OTC to the fluorescence quenched Au NCs-Hg2+ systerm, the fluorescence could be dramaticly recoverd (Fig. 3A). 
 
Fig. 3 (A) Digital photographs under UV illumination of the Ser/MUA co-functionalized Au NCs in the absence (a) and presence (b) of Hg2+. Digital photographs under UV illumination of the fluorescence quenched system in the absence (c) and presence of 20μM of (d) SPM, (e) ERY, (f) STR, (g) CHL, (h) OTC, (i) NEO, (j) TC and (k) CTC. (B) Fluorescence emission spectra of the Ser/MUA co-functionalized Au NCs with the addition of different Hg2+ concentrations increasing from 0 to 50 μM. (C) Fluorescence spectra of the fluorescence quenched system with increasing concentration of CTC and OTC. (D) Linear curve for CTC detection. (E) Linear curve for OTC detection.
It's worth noting that the recovered fluorescent color was blue (for CTC) and green (for OTC) rather than red. According to the previous reports, blue shift (e.g., from red fluorescent color to green or blue) would be occurred with the increasing binding energy and decreasing fluorescence lifetime [24]. Therefore, we performed the XPS and fluorescence lifetime experiments to illustrating the possible mechanism for color change. As shown in Fig. 4A, the binding energy of Au 4f for the Au NCs was indeed slightly increased after adding OTC and CTC to the Au NCs-Hg2+ solutions, while the average lifetime of the Au NCs decreased (Fig. 4B). In short, the increased binding energy and decreased fluorescence lifetime might be the reason resulting in the change of fluorescence color of Au NCs (from red to green and blue), which was in accordance with the previous report [25]. Hence, the recovering behavior of OTC and CTC on the fluorescence emission was investigated based on the fluorescence “turn on” process. As shown in Fig. 3C, with the increasing concentration of CTC and OTC, the fluorescence intensities at 420 nm and 500 nm simultaneously increased with excellent linear correlations, respectively. It was concluded that the fluorescence intensity increased linearly with the concentration of CTC from 0.05 to 1.875 μM with a detection limit of 0.02 μM (Fig. 3D), whereas OTC can be quantified within a linear range from 0.25 to 9.375 μM with a detection limit of 0.09 μM (Fig. 3E). 
 
Fig. 4 (A) XPS spectrum of Au 4f for red fluorescent (spectrum a), green fluorescent (spectrum b) and blue fluorescent (spectrum c) Au NCs. (B) Fluorescence lifetime of red fluorescent (a), green fluorescent (b) and blue fluorescent Au NCs.
3.3Visualization detection and cross-reaction analysis
As a simple homogeneous methodology for antibiotics analysis, visualization detection can also be obviously realized by UV lamp illumination. Fig. 5 shows the photos of semi-quantitative determination of OTC and CTC, respectively. When OTC was added to the fluorescent quenched solution, the recovered green color increased with increasing the concentration of OTC (Fig. 5A). Similarly, When CTC was added to the fluorescent quenched solution, the recovered blue color increased with increasing the concentration of CTC (Fig. 5B). If both OTC and CTC were added to the fluorescent quenched solution, the fluorescence emission of the two distinguishing colored blue (420 nm) and green (500 nm) increased simultaneously, and the solution exhibited their mixed color (Fig. 5C).
  In addition, due to the high significance of eliminating the cross-reactivity between analytes for simultaneous multiple analyte detection, we investigated the degree of cross-reactivity between CTC and OTC by comparing the recovered fluorescence at 420 nm and 500 nm, respectively. As shown in Fig. 5D, when OTC alone was added to the quenched solution, only the fluorescence intensity at 500nm increased and the fluorescence emission at 420 nm remained constant. By comparison, when CTC alone was added to the quenched solution, only blue fluorescence emission at 420 nm increased and the fluorescence emission at 500 nm remained constant (Fig. 5E). These results showed the cross-reactivity between CTC and OTC was negligible, guaranteeing the accuracy and reliability of the proposed assay for simultaneous detection. 
           
Fig. 5 Photograph of semi-quantitative determination of AFP and CEA, respectively, and simultaneously under UV illumination. (A) The fluorescence quenched mixtures added with various amounts of AFP (from left to right): 0, 30, 60, 120, 150, and 200 nM. (B) The fluorescence quenched mixtures added with various amounts of CEA (from left to right): 0, 15, 60, 120, 150, and 200 nM. (C) The fluorescence quenched mixtures added with various amounts of AFP and CEA. The concentrations of AFP were 200, 150, 120, 60, and 0 nM, and the concentrations of CEA were 0, 60, 120, 150, and 200 nM (from left to right).
3.4 Detection of OTC and CTC in human urine sample
 In order to further enlarge the potential practical application of this proposed assay, the recovery rates of different concentrations of OTC and CTC in human urine were detected. We selected three final OTC concentrations (1.0 μM, 5.0 μM and 8.0 μM) and CTC concentrations (0.5 μM, 1.0 μM and 1.5 μM), which are in their corresponding liner range (0.25-9.375 μM for OTC and 0.05-1.875 μM for CTC) for the real sample test. As shown in Table S1, the recoveries were acceptable, ranging from 97.6% to 102.0% for OTC and 93.3%-103.0% for CTC, indicating this proposed assay could be applied to the quantitative detection of OTC and CTC in real samples.
4. Conclusions
In summary, a simple and effective method for rapid preparing thiolate-protected Au NCs was proposed. Afterwards, we established a simple and novel fluorescent “turn on” assay for simultaneous detection of CTC and OTC with the assistance of Hg2+. Moreover, quantitative determination of CTC and OTC in human urine could also be achieved, showing feasible potential in clinical application. We expect the present work not only provide a new strategy for the synthesis of thiolate-protected Au NCs, but also contribute to simultaneous detection of multiple antibiotics residues in clinical applications.
Acknowledgements
S. Xu, Y. Mao, Y. Nie and J. Wang are grateful for the financialsupport provided by NSFC (21505081) and the Doctoral Found of QUST (010022832). X. Luo acknowledges the financial support by NSFC (21422504 and 21675093), the Natural Science Foundation of Shandong Province of China (JQ201406) and the Taishan Scholar Program of Shandong Province, China(ts20110829).
Reference
[1] H. Hou, X.J. Bai, C.Y. Xing, N.Y. Gu, B.L. Zhang, J.L. Tang, Aptamer-based cantilever array sensors for oxytetracycline detection, Anal. Chem. 85 (2013) 2010-2014.
[2] Z.D. Yan, N. Gan, T.H. Li, Y.T. Cao, Y.J. Chen, A sensitive electrochemical aptasensor for multiplex antibiotics detection based on high-capacity magnetic hollow porous nanotracers coupling exonuclease-assisted cascade target recycling, Biosens. Bioelectron. 78 (2016)51-57.
[3] I.P. Silva, J.A. Rodriguez, M.T.R. Silva, M.E.P. Hernandez, Determination of oxytetracycline in milk samples by polymer inclusion membrane separation coupled to high performance liquid chromatography, Anal. Chim. Acta. 718 (2012) 42-46.
[4] Y. Wang, N. Gan, Y. Zhou, T.H. Li, F.T. Hu, Y.T. Cao, Y.J. Chen, Novel label-free and high-throughput microchip electrophoresis platform for multiplex antibiotic residues detection based on aptamer probes and target catalyzed hairpin assembly for signal amplification, Biosens. Bioelectron. 97 (2017) 100-106.
[5] J. Li, F. Jiang, X. Wei, Molecularly imprinted sensor based on an enzyme amplifier for ultratrace oxytetracycline determination, Anal. Chem. 82 (2010) 6074-6078.
[6] L.Y. Chen, C.W. Wang, Z. Yuan, H.T. Chang, Fluorescent Gold Nanoclusters: Recent Advances in Sensing and Imaging, Anal. Chem. 87 (2015) 216-229.
[7] S.H. Xu, T. Gao, X.Y. Feng, Y.N. Mao, P.P. Liu, X.J. Yu, X.L. Luo, J. Mater. Chem. B 4 (2016), 1270-1275.
[8] S.H. Xu, X.Y. Feng, T. Gao, G.F. Liu, Y.N. Mao, J.H. Lin, X.J. Yu, X.L. Luo, Aptamer induced multicoloured Au NCs-MoS2 “switch on” fluorescence resonance energy transfer biosensor for dual color simultaneous detection of multiple tumor markers by single wavelength excitation, Anal. Chim. Acta. 983 (2017) 173-180.
[9] H.H. Deng, L.N. Zhang, S.B. He, A.L. Liu, G.W. Li, X.H. Lin, X.H. Xia, W. Chen, Methionine-Directed Fabrication of Gold Nanoclusters with Yellow Fluorescent Emission for Cu2+ Sensing, Biosens. Bioelectron. 65 (2015) 397-403.
[10] P.P. Bian, J. Zhou, Y.Y. Liu, Z.F. Ma, One-step fabrication of intense red fluorescent gold nanoclusters and their application in cancer cell imaging, Nanoscale 5 (2013) 6161-6166.
[11] J. Sun, F. Yang, D. Zhao, X.R. Yang, Highly sensitive real-time assay of inorganic pyrophosphatase activity based on the fluorescent gold nanoclusters, Anal. Chem. 86 (2014) 7883-7889.
[12] L. Shang, N. Azadfar, F. Stockmar, W. Send, V. Trouillet, M. Bruns, D. Gerthsen, G.U. Nienhaus, One-Pot Synthesis of Near-Infrared Fluorescent Gold Clusters for Cellular Fluorescence Lifetime Imaging, Small 7 (2011) 2614-2620.
[13] A. Santosh, B.K.C. Remant, N. Dharmaraj, N. Bhattarai, C.H. Kim, H.Y. Kim, Spectroscopic identification of S-Au interaction in cysteine capped gold nanoparticles, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A 63 (2006) 160-163.
[14] Y. Wang, J.T. Chen, X.P. Yan, Fabrication of Transferrin Functionalized Gold Nanoclusters/Graphene Oxide Nanocomposite for Turn-On Near-Infrared Fluorescent    Bioimaging of Cancer Cells and Small Animals, Anal. Chem. 85 (2013) 2529-2535.
[15] L. Shang, R.M. Dörlich, S. Brandholt, R. Schneider, V. Trouillet, M. Bruns, D. Gerthsen, G.U. Nienhaus, Facile preparation of water-soluble fluorescent gold nanoclusters for cellular imaging applications, Nanoscale 3 (2011) 2009-2014.
[16] R.L. Whetten, R.C. Price, Nano-Golden Order, Science 318 (2007) 407-408.
[17] Z.K. Wu, R.C. Jin, On the ligand's role in the fluorescence of gold nanoclusters, Nano Lett. 10 (2010) 2568-2573.
[18] C. Zhou, C. Sun, M. Yu, Y. Qin, J. Wang, M. Kim, J. Zheng, Luminescent gold nanoparticles with mixed valence states generated from dissociation of polymeric Au (I) thiolates, J. Phys. Chem. C 114 (2010) 7727-7732.
[19] S.H. Xu, X.Y. Feng, T. Gao, R.Z. Wang, Y.N. Mao, J.H. Lin, X.J. Yu, X.L. Luo, A novel dual-functional biosensor for fluorometric detection of inorganic pyrophosphate and pyrophosphatase activity based on globulin stabilized gold nanoclusters, Anal. Chim. Acta. 958 (2017) 22-29.
[20] K. Pyo, V.D. Thanthirige, K. Kwak, P. Pandurangan, G. Ramakrishna, D. Lee, Ultrabright Luminescence from Gold Nanoclusters: Rigidifying the Au(I)–Thiolate Shell, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 137 (2015) 8244-8250.
[21] C.C. Huang, H.T. Chang, Parameters for selective colorimetric sensing of mercury (II) in aqueous solutions using mercaptopropionic acid-modified gold nanoparticles, Chem. Commun. 12 (2007) 1215-1217.
[22] C.C. Huang, Z. Yang, K.H. Lee, H.T. Chang, Synthesis of highly fluorescent gold nanoparticles for sensing mercury (II), Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 46 (2007) 6824-6828.
[23] W. Chen, X. Tu, X. Guo, Fluorescent gold nanoparticles-based fluorescence sensor for Cu2+ ions, Chem. Commun. 13 (2009) 1736-1738.
[24] P.D. Ross, S. Subramanian, Thermodynamics of protein association reactions:forces contributing to stability,  Biochemistry 20 (1981) 3096-3102.
[25] H. Kawasaki, K. Hamaguchi, I. Osaka, R. Arakawa, ph-Dependent synthesis of pepsin-mediated gold nanoclusters with blue green and red fluorescent emission, Adv. Funct. Mater. 21 (2011) 3508-3515.
